
Intro:
Archives have the power to of shaping the knowledge of future generations to come. If it were not for archives, individuals would have fewer protections of rights, as well as very limited historical knowledge. The purpose of The Valley Project is to detail the lives of a Northern and Southern American community ranging from 1859-1870 through thousands of letters, newspapers, speeches, and diaries of the men and women who lived in the chosen communities.

Concept and Content:
The Valley Project intends to reach thousands of readers with the lost stories of individual’s lives during the Civil War era. This digital archive considers itself a library as opposed to a single book, as “there is no one story in the Valley Project”. Most of the sources used in The Valley Project are primary sources, as the information transferred to the website comes straight from letters, newspapers, diaries, etc. from the Civil War Era. Primary sources aside, statistics were gathered from government websites, increasing the credibility of this project. Generally speaking, using primary sources and credible statistics the creators of this project were able to give readers an opportunity to understand what life was like during the Civil War Era, which was the premise of this project.

Design and Technique
The Valley Project offers a simplistic, user-friendly interface, allowing the users to easily sift through archives in three separate eras, the eve of war, the war years, as well as the aftermath. For the most part, the layout of the website stays consistent, as each era featured in the project cites newspapers, images, and letters/diaries during the three eras; however, it is perplexing to see the site map labeled under “The Eve of War”. Rather than having the user look through the three eras to find a map of the project, it would most likely be more effective to include the site map as its own entity, along with and introduction to the project. Another critique I have of The Valley Project is the disuse of a search bar on the main page. Search bars allow users to easily navigate a website, allowing them to search for what they want throughout the whole website. Since there are hundreds of letters, newspapers, images, etc. a search bar would be an effective aspect for this project. The only way to access a search bar is to click on the [Reference Center](http://valley.lib.virginia.edu/VoS/reference1.html), where you are then able to search through databases of all three eras. Since the purpose of The Valley Project is to inform the users of the forgotten stories during the Civil War Era, the interface appears to be designed to persuade users to become more informed. It was clear from the introduction of the website, that the creators were more focused on the letters/diaries and newspapers from the Civil War Era than statistics and veteran records, which explains why the “Letters and Diaries” and “Newspapers” boxes are the largest amongst the other, inducing the user to click on those particular boxes first.

Collaborative and Documentation 
Despite using mostly primary sources, The Valley Project has a vast list of other secondary sources featured in the Reference Center. What makes the bibliography so effective is its simplicity; rather than scrolling through the hundreds of listed sources, users are able to narrow their search down to any of the listed subjects featured at the top of the bibliography, where the site will then guide the user to all of the sources they used for that specific subject. Since the site went live in 2007, the creators have continued to update the website, allowing this digital collection to continue to develop. The creators of this digital project site the use of the [Apache Solar](http://lucene.apache.org/solr/) as their means for content-retrieval pages. Collaborating with other programs and digital humanities projects is essential to carrying out a successful site, as The Valley Project clearly marks how they obtained their sources, as well as the programs they used to allow for a more simplistic project.

Conclusion
The most valuable asset of this digital humanities project is its ability to reach such a vast audience. Whether you are a Civil War historian, or a high-school junior taking a Civil War course, this project provides valuable information that can relate to essentially all users. With the website continually being updated, new information will always be made available for users of this project. Using Shannon Mattern’s “Evaluating Multimodal Work” as a guideline for critiquing The Valley Project, I say with certainty that this digital humanities project is very successful, meeting most of the Mattern’s criteria for an effective multimodal work.
